# Project Description

This repository contains the code for project 'Image Caption Generator using Reinforcement Learning' completed as the final project for course 'CS 5180: Reinforcement Learning and
Sequential Decision Making (Spring 2024)'. 

Contributors : Arun Madhusudhanan, Tejaswini Dilip Deore.

Generating meaningful captions for an image is a challenging task in machine learning. Researchers have come up with various methods to perform this task.  Most of the existing approaches are based on deep learning models. These models normally have a Convolutional neural network (CNN) as encoder and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) as a decoder. In this project, we explore image captioning as a decision-making process and train the models using reinforcement learning. We implement the "Deep Reinforcement Learning-based Image Captioning with Embedding Reward" approach proposed by Zhou Ren et al., which presents an innovative approach towards image captioning using deep reinforcement learning techniques enhanced by an embedding reward mechanism. We focus on comparing the reinforcement learning based model with the results generated by deep learning based model. We evaluate the results using metrics like BLEU, ROUGE, METEOR, and CIDEr on Flickr8k dataset. Our findings indicate that the results generated using reinforcement learning based model were slightly better than the results from deep learning based model.


## Dataset used

Please refer to Jason Brownlee's GITHUB link to Download Flickr_8k dataset

1. Flickr8k_Dataset.zip https://github.com/jbrownlee/Datasets/releases/download/Flickr8k/Flickr8k_Dataset.zip

2. Flickr8k_text.zip https://github.com/jbrownlee/Datasets/releases/download/Flickr8k/Flickr8k_text.zip

## Acknowledgements

1. Jason Brownlee : Hosting Flickr_8K dataset
2. Ramakrishna Vedantam and Tsung-Yi Lin: Authors of cider.py and cider_score.py
